🚀 Complete KMK Installation Procedure

This guide walks you through installing CircuitPython, setting up the KMK firmware, and flashing the custom files onto both halves of your RP2040 split keyboard.



Phase 1: Install CircuitPython (Do this for BOTH halves)

KMK runs on top of CircuitPython. You need to install the CircuitPython operating system on your microcontrollers first.

Download CircuitPython: Go to circuitpython.org and download the .uf2 file specifically for your exact microcontroller (e.g., Raspberry Pi Pico, Waveshare RP2040 Zero). Use version 8.x or 9.x.

Bootloader Mode: Hold down the BOOTSEL button on your microcontroller while plugging it into your computer via USB.

Flash: Your computer will recognize a new USB flash drive called RPI-RP2 (or similar). Drag and drop the .uf2 file onto this drive.

Reboot: The board will automatically disconnect and reconnect as a new drive named CIRCUITPY.




Phase 2: Install the KMK Core (Do this for BOTH halves)

Now we need to put the KMK "engine" onto the board.

Download KMK: Go to the KMK GitHub repository and download the .zip file of the latest release.

Extract: Unzip the downloaded file.

Copy: Inside the unzipped folder, locate the folder named exactly kmk.

Paste: Drag and drop that entire kmk folder directly onto your CIRCUITPY drive.
(Your drive should now contain a folder named kmk and a few default files like code.py or boot_out.txt).




Phase 3: Copy Your Custom Files

Now we apply your specific keyboard layout, RGB rules, and USB settings.

On the LEFT (Master) Half:

Delete any file named code.py or main.py that currently exists on the CIRCUITPY drive.

Copy your custom boot.py to the root of the drive.

Copy your custom main.py to the root of the drive.

Ensure line 39 says: split_side=SplitSide.LEFT,

On the RIGHT (Slave) Half:

Plug the Right half into your PC via USB.

Delete any existing code.py or main.py.

Copy your custom boot.py to the root of the drive.

Copy your custom main.py to the root of the drive.

Open the right side's main.py in a text editor and change Line 39 to:
split_side=SplitSide.RIGHT,

Save the file.




Phase 4: The Hardware Sync Boot (Crucial!)

Because we are using Hardware PIO for lightning-fast RGB and keystroke syncing, the physical sequence of how you plug them in the very first time matters.

Unplug everything. (No USB cables connected to the PC, TRRS cable unplugged).

Connect the Halves: Plug the TRRS cable firmly into both the Left and Right halves. (Never plug/unplug the TRRS cable while the keyboard has power, or you risk shorting the board!)

Power the Master: Plug the USB cable from your computer into the LEFT half only.

The Left side will boot up, realize it is the Master, reach across the TRRS wire using the Hardware PIO clock, wake up the Right side, and synchronize the RGB LEDs.




File Structure Verification

If you open your CIRCUITPY drive on either half, it should look exactly like this:

CIRCUITPY/
│
├── kmk/                  <-- (Folder containing the KMK engine)
├── boot.py               <-- (Your custom USB override script)
├── main.py               <-- (Your custom layout and RGB script)
└── boot_out.txt          <-- (Auto-generated by the system)


🛠️ Quick Troubleshooting

Keyboard types instantly but right side LEDs are frozen: You skipped Phase 4. Unplug the USB, ensure TRRS is seated, and plug the USB back in.

Keyboard doesn't type at all on PC: Ensure your boot.py is present and successfully hides the CircuitPython default USB endpoints.

Half the keys type the wrong letters: Check your GP12 wiring and ensure your 4.7kΩ SMD 472 pull-up resistor is properly installed between GP12 and 3V3.
